funny website hosted by github
# Geology projects
**Northeast VS Southeast Minnesota**

The geology of Minnesota is quite a long and confusing one. There are many many factors and events to take into account. But before we get into the specifics, we need to recap important general geology content.

There are three main types of rocks. Igneous, sedimentary, and metamorphic. Igneous rocks are formed from the cooling of magma and lava, and the rock is classified differently depending on where it is formed. If rock formed from magma underground, it is called an intrusive igneous rock. If a rock formed from lava on the surface, it is called an extrusive igneous rock. The main types of intrusive igneous rocks found in Minnesota are Gabbro, Anorthosite, and Granite. The main types of extrusive igneous rocks found in Minnesota are Basalt and Rhyolite. 

There are three types of sedimentary rocks; clastic, chemical, and organic. Clastic sedimentary rocks are what most people think of when they hear the words “sedimentary rocks.” Clastic sedimentary rocks are formed by the erosion, deposition, and compaction of sediments. Chemical sedimentary rocks are formed from the precipitation of particles. Not to be confused with precipitation, which is rain, snow or hail falling to the ground, to precipitate is to become a solid. Organic sedimentary rocks are formed from the remains of dead organisms. An example of an organic sedimentary rock is Coal, although there is not enough of it in Minnesota to be noteworthy. Examples of clastic sedimentary rocks in Minnesota are Sandstone and Shale. Examples of chemical sedimentary rocks in Minnesota are Limestone and Dolostone.

Metamorphic rocks are formed when other types of rocks go under intense heat and/or pressure. The two types of metamorphism are Contact metamorphism and Regional metamorphism. Contact metamorphism is when a rock is metamorphosed through intense heat. Regional metamorphism is when a rock is metamorphosed through intense pressure. The main types of metamorphic rocks in Minnesota are Gneiss, Slate, and Greenstone. Now you might be wondering how metamorphic rocks formed if there’s no fault lines or volcanoes in Minnesota. Well we’ll get back to that.

Igneous rocks such as granite and gabbro are used lots for construction due to their strength. Examples include buildings (both interior and exterior), roads, foundations, monuments, and concrete. Limestone, which is a sedimentary rock, is also used to make concrete or asphalt for roads. Shale, which is also a sedimentary rock, is used to make brick and tiles. Gneiss, which is a metamorphic rock, is also used to make buildings and monuments.

The rocks in Minnesota are many different ages. Some of them are one point eight billion years old, some are one point one billion years old, and some are only four hundred fifty million years old. And now it is time to recap the entire history of Minnesota, North America, and the Earth. Four point six billion years ago, the earth formed. Yippee! Then a Mars-sized object hits the Earth, and now we have a Moon. Yippee. Again. Eventually the Earth cools down from the chaos of its formation and becomes a water planet. Three point eight billion years ago, the first life forms, but it won't be multicellular for a couple billion years.

Our first stop in Minnesota’s history is one point eight billion years ago. At the time, the location that would eventually become Minnesota was the bottom of the ocean. The mountains of the ancient Earth contained lots of iron, which were slowly eroded away over time. The iron slipped into the ocean, where it reacted with oxygen in the water produced by photosynthetic Cyanobacteria, to make Iron Oxide. The iron oxide precipitated and fell to the ocean floor, where it was buried by other sediments and compressed to form iron ore. That is right, iron ore is a sedimentary rock! At roughly the same time, sediments elsewhere compressed together to form shale, a different sedimentary rock.

Seven hundred million years later, (that is one point one billion years ago in total,) a drastic event began. Minnesota was part of a supercontinent named Rodinia and laid very close to the equator. A magma plume from deep within the mantle rose up and formed a rift in the middle of the supercontinent, and it began to split it apart! Massive volumes of lava poured out of the rift, and a huge basin was formed (remember this for later). Much farther east, a mountain range called the Grenville Mountains began forming. Luckily, the formation of these mountains caused the rift to fail, and the continent did not split apart. The lava from the rift cooled, and formed the various igneous rocks found in Northeastern Minnesota. But the rift has one last trick up its sleeve. The intense heat released by the rift caused the shale (remember that?) to metamorphose into slate, tilting it to a unique forty-five degree angle. This rare slate can be seen nowadays at Jay Cooke State Park.

Skip ahead about half a billion years and things have changed a lot. Life is multicellular and thriving in the Ordovician seas four hundred and fifty million years ago. The area that will eventually become Southeastern Minnesota is a beautiful coral reef in a shallow tropical sea. The rising and falling of seas over a couple million years caused lots of buildup of sedimentary rocks such as sandstone, limestone, and dolostone. When creatures in this time period died, their bodies fell to the seafloor and their soft parts rotted away, leaving the hard parts behind. Over time, these body parts (mainly shells) got buried under sediments and rock and were fossilized.

The last stop on our geologic journey through time is the last ice age, which lasted from two point four million years ago to ten thousand years ago. During this ice age, massive ice sheets formed, some up to three miles thick. As the ice sheets plowed across the continent, they acted like bulldozers, flattening land, carving out the Great Lakes (including the basin leftover from the Mid-Continent Rift!), transferring agates farther south (more on them later), and leaving scratches in rocks called Striations. When the glaciers began to recede, sometimes a large chunk would break off and form a lake known as a kettle lake. 

Southeast Minnesota is not just the land of ten thousand limestone deposits, it is also the land of ten thousand random holes in the ground. This is due to the Karst topography of the area. Because the land is built on soft sedimentary limestone, acidic rain can wear away at the rock, creating sinkholes and cave systems. This leads into its own whole section of content, with landforms like disappearing streams and all the speleothems that can be found in the caves down south.

Things are a little different up north. Due to the abundance of igneous rocks, there are no sinkholes or caves. What it does have however, is IRON BABY. OH YEAH WE GET TO TALK ABOUT IRON NOW. (Can you tell that I am tired?) Becuase of all this one point eight billion year old iron ore, people set up a crap ton of mines there. There are three iron ranges in Minnesota, but only one is active nowadays. Companies pay a ton of money to get permits to mine on the land, and they set up giant open-pit mines to find that rich iron ore, and then turn around and sell it for profit. Because of this, Minnesota is the number one iron producer in the country. 

These boring mines are not the only interesting landforms in the northeast. In some places, iron ore combined with other rocks and minerals to create a really interesting feature called the Banded Iron Formation, and scientists today still argue about how it was created. Also, because of that rift incident a little over a billion years ago, we got a ton of basalt and rhyolite and other crap. But inside some of these rocks is something special. When lava cools and hardens, it sometimes has carbon dioxide bubbles inside it. These bubbles are known as vesicles, and get trapped in the rock. Over time, water and minerals such as quartz and silica can fill up the vesicles and form these beautiful gemstones called agates (which are, fun fact, the state gemstone).

There is one more important landform in northeast Minnesota, and it is kinda hard to miss. That is because it is the MASSIVE GREAT LAKE THAT IS LAKE SUPERIOR. Lake Superior has quite a long and interesting backstory of its own, but I do not want to get sidetracked. In short, the rift event created a depression in the ground called a basin. Over the next billion years or so, it got filled in by sediments. When the glaciers showed up over 2 million years ago, they excavated the basin when they carved the other Great Lakes. Then they melted, filling up the basin(s). You might be thinking that that is way too much water to fit in modern-day Lake Superior, and you’d be right. When the lake first filled in, the water level was multiple hundreds of feet higher than it is nowadays. The lake back then was known as Glacial Luke Duluth, and changes in the shoreline created many interesting cliffs and waterfalls, such as the triple falls as Gooseberry State Park.

Okay cool. We got two completely separate areas of Minnesota, each with their own dramatic geologic histories. But are they really that different? Mostly. They do have some similarities. Both regions have sedimentary rocks, but only the northeast has metamorphic and igneous rocks. Both regions have a sea/ocean involved in their formation, but only the southeast has karst topography and caves and sinkholes.

Now I ask myself the question, “what the hell have I actually learned in the past month(ish)?” Well, I have learned about limestone and karst topography. I have learned about caves and sinkholes and how they form. I have learned about all the cute little speleothems you can find in caves, such as stalactites, stalagmites, flowstone, cave bacon, and more. I have learned about the ancient seas that once covered the area, and the cephalopods that once lived there. I have learned that Lake Superior was not, in fact, created solely by glaciers like I have been led to believe my whole life. I have learned why Minnesota is the number one iron producer in the country, why there is so much iron there, every important step on how to mine the iron from blasting it out of the ground to crushing it to making it into pellets to shipping it across the lakes to be made into steel. I have learned about the chaos created by the mid continent rift, how it created unique tilted slate and massive lava flows. I have learned how agates form and how to find them (and also the fact that they exist because I had never heard of them before this class). Last but most certainly not least, I have learned to care for my classmates and my home state just a little bit more each and every day.

**Minnesota Dam VS Global Dam**

Hello. My name is Colin, and in this dam video, I am going to be comparing and contrasting the International Falls Dam in Minnesota, with the Oroville Dam in California. But before I get into that, I am going to go over some basic dam information.

In case you didn’t know, a dam is a structure which partially or completely obstructs the flow of a lake or river. Originally perfected by beavers, humanity stole the idea and all the credit. People build dams for many reasons, but the main three are irrigation, flood control, and electricity. 

In an electricity-producing dam, called a hydroelectric dam, water from the reservoir behind the dam flows through the dam to make electricity. First it enters a pipe called a penstock. The penstock leads to a turbine, which spins rapidly when water flows through it. The water then flows out of the dam into a river. When the turbine spins, a rod connected to it brings energy to a generator, which makes electricity.

So are dams good or bad? Well, there are both pros and cons for having dams. Pro number one: It’s clean energy! No pollution or fossil fuels or nuclear waste. Clean renewable dam energy. Pro number two: Flood control. If there is too much water in a reservoir, the dam can release the water to prevent the reservoir from overflowing. Pro number three: Recreation. Since a reservoir is technically a lake, you can use it for all of your “lake…y” activities. Like swimming, fishing, hiding bodies, waterskiing, all that jazz.

Dams aren’t all sunshine and rainbows. They have downsides too. Con number one: They are expensive. Dams take MILLIONS of tons of concrete and YEARS of work to build. A lot of money, and a lot of work. Con number two: They damage ecosystems. Consider the salmon for a long moment. They swim up and down rivers and streams to mate and spawn. But all of a sudden, the river is blocked, and the salmon can go no further. Con number three: They are dangerous. Because of how long it takes and how hard it is to build a dam, people can (and probably will) die during construction. If the dam fails, all the water in the reservoir could cause millions of dollars of damage and kill thousands of people.

Dams affect humans in many ways. I have already explained that they generate power, provide recreation spots, and protect from floods, but they do more than just that. The construction and demolition of dams can provide thousands of people with jobs. The reservoir that forms is a great method of storing water. And since dams are very large, they can be a decent landmark for navigation too.

Wildlife, on the other hand, isn’t as lucky. If a dam is built in a forest, hundreds of trees will likely need to be removed. The blockage of a river prevents fish migration, and the unnaturally formed “lake” behind the dam can turn an ecosystem on its head.

The International Falls Dam is a hydroelectric arch dam on the Rainy River, and forms the Rainy Lake reservoir behind it (not to be confused with the other Rainy Lake, which is the source of the Rainy River). It is five hundred and five feet wide, twenty-nine feet high, and has a maximum discharge of 7,650 cubic feet per second. It was built by the International Falls Power Company in 1909 to create electricity, and is now 115 years old. The dam is located in Koochiching County, Minnesota, near the city of Baudette. The source of the Rainy River is Rainy Lake (not be confused with the other Rainy Lake, which is the reservoir that is formed by the dam), and its mouth is the Lake of the Woods. The Rainy River is 137 miles long and forms part of the border separating Minnesota from Canada.

The National Geographic Seven Perspectives allow us to look at parts of our world in ways we never would’ve thought of before. In a normal scenario, you wouldn’t care about how a dam was built. However, if we put on the Historical Lense we can see that the dam was not built in just one year. Construction actually started in 1905, however was not completed until 1909.

In 1910 the dam was used to power mills along the edge of the river. A paper company was started, powered off of the dam. In 2017, the spill gates on the dam slowly became dysfunctional, and Rainy Lake flooded because of it.

When the river was first dammed, the water was fouled with sediment, and became cloudy. Toxins harmed life in the river, and wastewater from the city flowed into the river with little to no treatment. However, over the last century, efforts to clean up the river have resulted in dozens of species of fish thriving in the river. 

The Oroville Dam is a hydroelectric embankment dam on the Feather River, and creates the Lake Oroville reservoir behind it. It is 6,920 feet wide, and seven hundred and seventy feet tall. This makes it the tallest dam in the United States. It was built by the California Department of Water Resources from 1961 to 1968, and is now fifty-six years old. It is one of the key features of the California State Water Project, providing power and allowing management of water levels. The dam is located in the city of Oroville in California, around seventy miles north of Sacramento. The source of the Feather River is technically Lake Oroville, where two smaller rivers converge. The mouth of the river is the Sacramento River, in the city of Verona.

If we again look at the history of this dam, it has a much more… unfortunate backstory. On July 22, 2009, three workers were nearly killed when suction from a river valve chamber pulled a wall downstream. An inspection in 2013 showed that the spillway had been cracked, but an engineer explained that it was normal. In 2017, immense rainfall had the dam’s spillways running over full capacity. After seeing signs of potential damage to the emergency spillway, almost two hundred thousand people living near the dam had to be evacuated. 

At the time of the dam’s construction, it contained the largest underground power station in the United States. In times of high demand, the dam can generate up to one hundred and fourteen megawatts of power. The water the dam releases and the power it generates contribute to irrigation of over seven hundred thousand acres, along with supplying roughly twenty-five million people.

The dam completely blocks the migration of salmon and trout in the Feather River, so a fish barrier dam was built in 1962 to redirect the fish up a fish ladder to the hatchery. The hatchery produces almost ten and a half million fish, which are released down the river gradually throughout the year.

Now these dams at first glance might seem pretty different at first glance, but they really aren’t. Both dams are hydroelectric, meaning that they both make electricity. They may have been built sixty years apart, but they both were still built in the twentieth century. And they also both have had issues related to damaged spillways in the past.

Did I convince you that these two dams are similar? Well I LIED. These dams are totally different from each other. Oroville is an embankment dam, while International Falls is an arch dam. While International Falls dam was built mainly for hydroelectric purposes, the Oroville dam does that as well as provide water for irrigation and control water levels to prevent floods. The Oroville dam is absolutely massive, and the International Falls dam is… kind of tiny.

But wait! There’s more! The rivers have similarities and differences too! Both rivers are over 100 miles long, and they both are (obviously) located within the United States. Fun fact: Both rivers were discovered between 1820 and 1840.

These rivers are actually pretty different from each other. The Rainy River is a border between the US and Canada, while the Feather River is in the middle of its home state. Feather forms from four smaller branches converging together, but Rainy comes from a lake. They also have different mouths. Rainy runs into another lake, and Feather runs into another river.

Breaking news: there are not a lot of similarities between a dam and river in California and a dam and river in Minnesota. In this dam unit, there were a lot of dam jokes made. There were originally going to be a lot in this script too, but I cut them out because I thought I was overdoing it. Before starting this unit, I knew roughly how a hydroelectric dam worked, and that dams create reservoirs, but I didn't know that there were multiple kinds, or that dams could be as small as some of them are. Researching for this topic allowed me to learn way more about two random small cities in Minnesota and California than I ever would've wanted to know beforehand. There was a bit of confusion after discovering that there are in fact TWO Rainy Lakes (the reservoir and the river source), but that didn’t cause too much. It was surprisingly hard to find information about the International Falls Dam, but that may have had something to do with the fact that I was on the border between Minnesota and Canada. Overall, I would say this was a pretty dam interesting unit! 
